---
layout: post
title: Evil ELFs
tags:
- programming
- reverse-engineering
---

In this post I am going to demonstrate how to easily find out what an evil
[ELF][1] is doing to your system. This can be useful if you have one that is
making secure network connections and you want to have a closer look… Or just
for fun.

[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Executable_and_Linkable_Format

## Linked library dependencies and `ldd`

The easiest to start with are linked library dependencies. In our example:

{% highlight bash %}
$ ldd ./evil-elf
  […]
  libcurl.so.4 => /usr/lib64/libcurl.so.4 (0x00007fa94ba57000)
  […]
{% endhighlight %}

The rest of the output is stripped; the important thing is that our app seems
to use `libcurl` to communicate with the evil servers.

## `LD_PRELOAD` and debug libraries

To have some more info on what is going on behind the scenes, we can grab a
copy of `libcurl` and build a debug version that has verbose logging enabled by
default.

{% highlight bash %}
$ wget http://curl.haxx.se/download/curl-7.34.0.tar.lzma
$ lzma -d curl-7.34.0.tar.lzma
$ cd curl-7.34.0
$ ./configure --enable-debug
$ make
{% endhighlight %}

Now we can use the debug version of `libcurl.so` to get a lot of debugging
output about the network connections made:

{% highlight bash %}
$ LD_PRELOAD=./curl-7.34.0/lib/.libs/libcurl.so ./evil-elf
{% endhighlight %}

The debug build automatically enables the [`CURLOPT_VERBOSE`] param, which logs
all connection information, except the transferred payload. To also log the
payload, have a look at the sample code in [`debug.c`][3] (part of the
`libcurl` project).

[2]: http://curl.haxx.se/libcurl/c/curl_easy_setopt.html#CURLOPTVERBOSE
[3]: http://curl.haxx.se/libcurl/c/debug.html

## Static (built-in) libs and `objdump`

Now that we can inspect the traffic, we can use `curl` to impersonate the app.
But what if the requests are signed, and the signature is verified on the
server? We want to be able to generatet hose fingerprints ourselves.

Let's assume that we've noticed a 40-char digit hex string in every request. 40
characters? It is most likely SHA1. But we didn't see any linked library that
could be used to generate such hashes… Perhaps they are not dynamically linked
(that happens often with distributed binaries).

To have a closer look at the evil app, let's take it apart with `objdump`:

{% highlight bash %}
$ objdump -ClDgTt -M intel evil-elf > evil-elf.asm
$ ag -i sha1 evil-elf.asm
35011:0000000000a8faae  w   DF .text    000000000000001a  Base        boost::uuids::detail::sha1::sha1()
2983642:  a8ec8e:       e8 61 10 00 00          call   a8fcf4 <boost::uuids::detail::sha1::process_bytes(void const*, unsigned long)>
2983647:  a8eca4:       e8 b7 13 00 00          call   a90060 <boost::uuids::detail::sha1::get_digest(unsigned int (&) [5])>
[…]
{% endhighlight %}

Bingo! It seems the Boost library is used to generate the sha1 hashes. A quick
look at the source reveals that the routines live inside `boost/uuid/sha1.hpp`.

## Runtime inspection with `gdb`

Instead of preloading a debug version of this, we'll use `gdb` to break
execution of the app when it feeds the string to be hashed:

{% highlight bash %}
$ gdb
GNU gdb (Gentoo 7.6.2 p1) 7.6.2
Copyright (C) 2013 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.  Type "show copying"
and "show warranty" for details.
This GDB was configured as "x86_64-pc-linux-gnu".
For bug reporting instructions, please see:
<http://bugs.gentoo.org/>.
(gdb) file ./evil-elf
(gdb) break boost::uuids::detail::sha1::process_bytes
(gdb) run
[…]
{% endhighlight %}

Now when execution stops at `process_bytes`, we know that the string (`char *`
to be strict) we need is somewhere at hand. Probably near the top of the stack,
or maybe in a register. We know it is the first parameter when calling the
function, but the compiler may have mangled that away, plus we have to consider
the hidden argument (`this`) implied when calling a C++ method.

{% highlight bash %}
Breakpoint 1, 0x0000000000a8fcf8 in boost::uuids::detail::sha1::process_bytes(void const*, unsigned long) ()
(gdb) info registers
rax            0x7fffffff8480   140737488323712
rbx            0x7fffffff8850   140737488324688
rcx            0x1208008        18907144
rdx            0x94     148
[…]
{% endhighlight %}

We can try printing these addresses as characters to see if we find our `char *`.

{% highlight bash %}
0x7fffffff8480: 1 '\001'        35 '#'  69 'E'  103 'g' -119 '\211'     -85 '\253'      -51 '\315'      -17 '\357'
0x7fffffff8488: -2 '\376'       -36 '\334'
(gdb) x/10c $rbx
0x7fffffff8850: 64 '@'  0 '\000'        0 '\000'        0 '\000'        0 '\000'        0 '\000'        0 '\000'        0 '\000'
0x7fffffff8858: 0 '\000'        0 '\000'
(gdb) x/10c $rcx
0x1208008:      80 'P'  79 'O'  83 'S'  84 'T'  38 '&'  104 'h' 116 't' 116 't'
0x1208010:      112 'p' 115 's'
{% endhighlight %}

There it is, in the `RCX` register! Let's print it as a string!

{% highlight bash %}
(gdb) x/s $rcx
0x1208008:      "POST&https%3A%2F%evil%2Ecom%2Fapi%2Fv1%2Fauth%2Fclient&&SECRET&1389088091&NONCE&SIGNATURE&"
{% endhighlight %}

Awesome. Now that we see how the signature is being generated, we can do the
same when faking the requests with `curl`.

## Automate it all with `.gdbinit`

One easy way to automate printing the data being hashed is by creating a
`.gdbinit` file like this:


{% highlight bash %}
set environment LD_PRELOAD=./curl-7.34.0/lib/.libs/libcurl.so

file ./evil-elf

break boost::uuids::detail::sha1::process_bytes
commands $bpnum
x/s $rcx
continue
end

run
{% endhighlight %}

Now, to start the monitered version of `evil-elf`, just run `gdb`, and the rest
will be taken care of.

## A few more hints

When running commands from `gdb`, you can call functions as well, using the
`call` command. However, it is easy to run into recursions, and `gdb` will stop
there, without completing the `call`ed function correctly. An easy fix is to
`disable` the breakpoint at the beginning of the `commands` block, and
re-enable them just before the `end`.

## Resources

* **gdb** — *the GNU debugger*: `man gdb`
* **objdump** — *display information from object files*: `man objdump`
* **libcurl** — *client-side URL transfers*: `man libcurl`
* **lsof** — *list open files*: `man lsof`
* `.gdbinit` commands: [this answer on stack exchange][4]

[4]: http://reverseengineering.stackexchange.com/a/3343/3531
